docs/guide/cookbook.md, before:

# VAMOS Cookbook

Common recipes and patterns for using VAMOS.

## Recommended path (optimize)

The `optimize(...)` API is the fastest way to run experiments in Python.

```python
from vamos import optimize
from vamos.ux.api import result_summary_text

result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=5000, pop_size=100, seed=0)
print(result_summary_text(result))
```

## 1. Custom Problem Definition

Define a problem by implementing `ProblemProtocol` (attributes plus `evaluate`):

```python
import numpy as np


class MyProblem:
    def __init__(self) -> None:
        self.n_var = 2
        self.n_obj = 2
        self.n_constr = 0
        self.xl = np.array([0.0, 0.0])
        self.xu = np.array([1.0, 1.0])
        self.encoding = "real"

    def evaluate(self, X: np.ndarray, out: dict[str, np.ndarray]) -> None:
        f1 = X[:, 0]
        f2 = (1.0 + X[:, 1]) / X[:, 0]
        out["F"] = np.column_stack([f1, f2])


problem = MyProblem()
```

## 2. Handling Constraints

Box constraints are handled via `xl` and `xu`. For other constraints, fill `out["G"]`. VAMOS expects g(x) <= 0 for feasible solutions. Set `n_constr` to the number of constraints if you want the count explicitly tracked.

```python
    def evaluate(self, X: np.ndarray, out: dict[str, np.ndarray]) -> None:
        # ... calculate F ...

        # Constraint: x[0] + x[1] <= 1.5
        g1 = (X[:, 0] + X[:, 1]) - 1.5
        out["G"] = g1.reshape(-1, 1)
```

### Constraint DSL (symbolic)

When you want a reusable constraint evaluator, build it symbolically:

```python
import numpy as np
from vamos.foundation.constraints.dsl import constraint_model, build_constraint_evaluator

with constraint_model(n_vars=2) as cm:
    x0, x1 = cm.vars("x0", "x1")
    cm.add(x0 + x1 <= 1.0)
    cm.add(x0 >= 0.0)

eval_constraints = build_constraint_evaluator(cm)
G = eval_constraints(np.array([[0.2, 0.3], [0.9, 0.4]]))
```

Notes:
- Constants must be scalar values (including 0-d arrays like `np.array(1.0)`).
- Vector constants are not supported; expand them into separate constraints.

## 3. Visualization Callback

Use `live_viz` to see progress or save frames.

```python
from vamos import optimize

class MyCallback:
    def __call__(self, algorithm):
        print(f"Gen {algorithm.n_gen}: {len(algorithm.pop)} solutions")
        # Access population: algorithm.pop.get("F")

optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=2000, live_viz=MyCallback())
```

## 4. Re-using Algorithm State (Checkpointing)

VAMOS algorithms are stateful. You can `resume()` them if you manually stepped them, or pickle them (ensure backends are pickleable).

*Note: Full checkpointing support is in active development.*

## 5. Using Numba for Performance

Select a backend via `optimize(..., engine=...)`.

```python
from vamos import optimize

result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", engine="numba", budget=5000)
```

## 6. Comparing Algorithms

Run multiple algorithms and plot their fronts together.

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from vamos import optimize

res_nsga2 = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=4000)
res_moead = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="moead", budget=4000)

plt.scatter(res_nsga2.F[:, 0], res_nsga2.F[:, 1], label="NSGA-II")
plt.scatter(res_moead.F[:, 0], res_moead.F[:, 1], label="MOEA/D")
plt.legend()
plt.show()
```

## 7. Inspect Auto-Resolved Defaults

See which top-level settings were inferred vs provided.

```python
from vamos import optimize

result = optimize("zdt1")
print(result.explain_defaults())
```

The output includes:

- `resolved_config`: resolved problem/algorithm/engine/budget/pop size
- `default_sources`: which values were inferred (`auto`) vs set explicitly

## 8. Operator Facade Access

Import common operators directly from `vamos.operators`.

```python
import numpy as np
from vamos.operators import SBXCrossover, PolynomialMutation

xl = np.zeros(30)
xu = np.ones(30)
crossover = SBXCrossover(prob_crossover=0.9, eta=15.0, lower=xl, upper=xu)
mutation = PolynomialMutation(prob=1 / 30, eta=20.0, lower=xl, upper=xu)
```

## 9. Multi-Seed Studies

Pass a list of seeds to run a small study in one call.

```python
from vamos import optimize
from vamos.ux.api import result_summary_text

results = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=4000, seed=[0, 1, 2, 3])
for idx, res in enumerate(results):
    print(idx, result_summary_text(res))
```

## 10. Algorithm Config Objects (Reproducible Runs)

Use a config object when you want every knob explicit.

```python
from vamos import optimize
from vamos.algorithms import NSGAIIConfig

cfg = (
    NSGAIIConfig.builder()
    .pop_size(100)
    .offspring_size(100)
    .crossover("sbx", prob=1.0, eta=20.0)
    .mutation("pm", prob="1/n", eta=20.0)
    .selection("tournament", pressure=2)
    .build()
)

result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", algorithm_config=cfg, budget=8000, seed=7)
```

## 11. Multiprocessing Evaluation

For expensive evaluations, use the multiprocessing backend explicitly.

```python
from vamos import optimize
from vamos.foundation.eval.backends import MultiprocessingEvalBackend

backend = MultiprocessingEvalBackend(n_workers=4)
result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=6000, eval_strategy=backend)
```

## 12. Hypervolume-Based Early Stopping

Stop once the hypervolume reaches a target fraction of the reference front.

```python
from vamos import optimize
from vamos.foundation.core.hv_stop import build_hv_stop_config

hv_cfg = build_hv_stop_config(hv_threshold=0.9, hv_reference_front=None, problem_key="zdt1")
hv_cfg["max_evaluations"] = 12000

result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", termination=("hv", hv_cfg), seed=3)
```

## 13. Save Results for Offline Analysis

Persist results to a folder for later inspection.

```python
from vamos import optimize
from vamos.ux.api import save_result

result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=5000)
save_result(result, "results/zdt1_nsgaii")
```

## 14. Select a Single Solution from the Front

Pick a knee point or a simple min objective.

```python
from vamos import optimize

result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=5000)
choice = result.best("knee")
print(choice["F"])
```

## 15. JAX Engine (Strict Ranking Default)

Use JAX for acceleration. Strict ranking is on by default and falls back to NumPy for exact Pareto fronts.

```python
from vamos import optimize

result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", engine="jax", budget=5000)
```

Set `VAMOS_JAX_STRICT_RANKING=0` for approximate ranking if you want maximum speed (may not match the exact Pareto front).

## 16. Reproduce a Run from resolved_config.json

If you ran via the CLI, each run stores a `resolved_config.json`. You can replay it:

```python
import json
from pathlib import Path

from vamos import optimize

resolved = json.loads(Path("results/zdt1/nsgaii/numpy/seed_7/resolved_config.json").read_text())

result = optimize(
    resolved["problem"],
    algorithm=resolved["algorithm"],
    engine=resolved["engine"],
    pop_size=resolved["pop_size"],
    budget=resolved["budget"],
    seed=resolved["seed"],
    n_var=resolved.get("n_var"),
    n_obj=resolved.get("n_obj"),
)
```

## 17. Validate a Config File (CLI)

Check a YAML/JSON experiment spec before running:

```bash
vamos --config configs/experiment.yaml --validate-config
```

## 18. Convert Results to a DataFrame (pandas)

Export results for analysis in pandas (requires the `analysis` extra).

```python
from vamos import optimize
from vamos.ux.api import result_to_dataframe

result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=4000)
df = result_to_dataframe(result)
df.to_csv("results/zdt1_nsgaii_front.csv", index=False)
```

## 19. Combine Fronts from Multiple Runs

Merge fronts from multiple runs and keep the non-dominated set.

```python
import numpy as np

from vamos import optimize
from vamos.foundation.metrics.pareto import pareto_filter

results = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=4000, seed=[0, 1, 2])
combined = np.vstack([res.F for res in results if res.F is not None])
front = pareto_filter(combined, return_indices=False)
```

## 20. Compute Hypervolume (2D)

Compute hypervolume for 2D minimization fronts.

```python
import numpy as np

from vamos import optimize
from vamos.foundation.metrics import compute_hypervolume

result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=4000)
F = np.asarray(result.F)
hv = compute_hypervolume(F, ref_point=[1.1, 1.1])
print(hv)
```

## 21. Normalized HV for ZDT Problems

Use the built-in reference front to compute normalized hypervolume on ZDT.

```python
import numpy as np

from vamos import optimize
from vamos.foundation.metrics import compute_normalized_hv

result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=4000)
hv_norm = compute_normalized_hv(np.asarray(result.F), "zdt1")
print(hv_norm)
```

Commit message:

feat(cli): introduce guided quickstart wizard for streamlined experiment setup feat(cli): add preflight checks for optional dependencies in quickstart feat(cli): implement results summarization and opening of latest run directories feat(cli): enhance argument parsing for quickstart and results commands feat(tests): add unit tests for quickstart and results CLI functionalities docs: create minimal Python track guide for quick experiment execution

docs/guide/cookbook.md, after:

# VAMOS Cookbook

Common recipes and patterns for using VAMOS.

## Recommended path (optimize)

The `optimize(...)` API is the fastest way to run experiments in Python.
See the API decision guide in `docs/guide/getting-started.md` if you need explicit config objects.

```python
from vamos import optimize
from vamos.ux.api import result_summary_text

result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=5000, pop_size=100, seed=0)
print(result_summary_text(result))
```

## 1. Custom Problem Definition

Define a problem by implementing `ProblemProtocol` (attributes plus `evaluate`):

```python
import numpy as np


class MyProblem:
    def __init__(self) -> None:
        self.n_var = 2
        self.n_obj = 2
        self.n_constr = 0
        self.xl = np.array([0.0, 0.0])
        self.xu = np.array([1.0, 1.0])
        self.encoding = "real"

    def evaluate(self, X: np.ndarray, out: dict[str, np.ndarray]) -> None:
        f1 = X[:, 0]
        f2 = (1.0 + X[:, 1]) / X[:, 0]
        out["F"] = np.column_stack([f1, f2])


problem = MyProblem()
```

## 2. Handling Constraints

Box constraints are handled via `xl` and `xu`. For other constraints, fill `out["G"]`. VAMOS expects g(x) <= 0 for feasible solutions. Set `n_constr` to the number of constraints if you want the count explicitly tracked.

```python
    def evaluate(self, X: np.ndarray, out: dict[str, np.ndarray]) -> None:
        # ... calculate F ...

        # Constraint: x[0] + x[1] <= 1.5
        g1 = (X[:, 0] + X[:, 1]) - 1.5
        out["G"] = g1.reshape(-1, 1)
```

### Constraint DSL (symbolic)

When you want a reusable constraint evaluator, build it symbolically:

```python
import numpy as np
from vamos.foundation.constraints.dsl import constraint_model, build_constraint_evaluator

with constraint_model(n_vars=2) as cm:
    x0, x1 = cm.vars("x0", "x1")
    cm.add(x0 + x1 <= 1.0)
    cm.add(x0 >= 0.0)

eval_constraints = build_constraint_evaluator(cm)
G = eval_constraints(np.array([[0.2, 0.3], [0.9, 0.4]]))
```

Notes:
- Constants must be scalar values (including 0-d arrays like `np.array(1.0)`).
- Vector constants are not supported; expand them into separate constraints.

## 3. Visualization Callback

Use `live_viz` to see progress or save frames.

```python
from vamos import optimize

class MyCallback:
    def __call__(self, algorithm):
        print(f"Gen {algorithm.n_gen}: {len(algorithm.pop)} solutions")
        # Access population: algorithm.pop.get("F")

optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=2000, live_viz=MyCallback())
```

## 4. Re-using Algorithm State (Checkpointing)

VAMOS algorithms are stateful. You can `resume()` them if you manually stepped them, or pickle them (ensure backends are pickleable).

*Note: Full checkpointing support is in active development.*

## 5. Using Numba for Performance

Select a backend via `optimize(..., engine=...)`.

```python
from vamos import optimize

result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", engine="numba", budget=5000)
```

## 6. Comparing Algorithms

Run multiple algorithms and plot their fronts together.

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from vamos import optimize

res_nsga2 = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=4000)
res_moead = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="moead", budget=4000)

plt.scatter(res_nsga2.F[:, 0], res_nsga2.F[:, 1], label="NSGA-II")
plt.scatter(res_moead.F[:, 0], res_moead.F[:, 1], label="MOEA/D")
plt.legend()
plt.show()
```

## 7. Inspect Auto-Resolved Defaults

See which top-level settings were inferred vs provided.

```python
from vamos import optimize

result = optimize("zdt1")
print(result.explain_defaults())
```

The output includes:

- `resolved_config`: resolved problem/algorithm/engine/budget/pop size
- `default_sources`: which values were inferred (`auto`) vs set explicitly

## 8. Operator Facade Access

Import common operators directly from `vamos.operators`.

```python
import numpy as np
from vamos.operators import SBXCrossover, PolynomialMutation

xl = np.zeros(30)
xu = np.ones(30)
crossover = SBXCrossover(prob_crossover=0.9, eta=15.0, lower=xl, upper=xu)
mutation = PolynomialMutation(prob=1 / 30, eta=20.0, lower=xl, upper=xu)
```

## 9. Multi-Seed Studies

Pass a list of seeds to run a small study in one call.

```python
from vamos import optimize
from vamos.ux.api import result_summary_text

results = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=4000, seed=[0, 1, 2, 3])
for idx, res in enumerate(results):
    print(idx, result_summary_text(res))
```

## 10. Algorithm Config Objects (Reproducible Runs)

Use a config object when you want every knob explicit.

```python
from vamos import optimize
from vamos.algorithms import NSGAIIConfig

cfg = (
    NSGAIIConfig.builder()
    .pop_size(100)
    .offspring_size(100)
    .crossover("sbx", prob=1.0, eta=20.0)
    .mutation("pm", prob="1/n", eta=20.0)
    .selection("tournament", pressure=2)
    .build()
)

result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", algorithm_config=cfg, budget=8000, seed=7)
```

## 11. Multiprocessing Evaluation

For expensive evaluations, use the multiprocessing backend explicitly.

```python
from vamos import optimize
from vamos.foundation.eval.backends import MultiprocessingEvalBackend

backend = MultiprocessingEvalBackend(n_workers=4)
result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=6000, eval_strategy=backend)
```

## 12. Hypervolume-Based Early Stopping

Stop once the hypervolume reaches a target fraction of the reference front.

```python
from vamos import optimize
from vamos.foundation.core.hv_stop import build_hv_stop_config

hv_cfg = build_hv_stop_config(hv_threshold=0.9, hv_reference_front=None, problem_key="zdt1")
hv_cfg["max_evaluations"] = 12000

result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", termination=("hv", hv_cfg), seed=3)
```

## 13. Save Results for Offline Analysis

Persist results to a folder for later inspection.

```python
from vamos import optimize
from vamos.ux.api import save_result

result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=5000)
save_result(result, "results/zdt1_nsgaii")
```

## 14. Select a Single Solution from the Front

Pick a knee point or a simple min objective.

```python
from vamos import optimize

result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=5000)
choice = result.best("knee")
print(choice["F"])
```

## 15. JAX Engine (Strict Ranking Default)

Use JAX for acceleration. Strict ranking is on by default and falls back to NumPy for exact Pareto fronts.

```python
from vamos import optimize

result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", engine="jax", budget=5000)
```

Set `VAMOS_JAX_STRICT_RANKING=0` for approximate ranking if you want maximum speed (may not match the exact Pareto front).

## 16. Reproduce a Run from resolved_config.json

If you ran via the CLI, each run stores a `resolved_config.json`. You can replay it:

```python
import json
from pathlib import Path

from vamos import optimize

resolved = json.loads(Path("results/zdt1/nsgaii/numpy/seed_7/resolved_config.json").read_text())

result = optimize(
    resolved["problem"],
    algorithm=resolved["algorithm"],
    engine=resolved["engine"],
    pop_size=resolved["pop_size"],
    budget=resolved["budget"],
    seed=resolved["seed"],
    n_var=resolved.get("n_var"),
    n_obj=resolved.get("n_obj"),
)
```

## 17. Validate a Config File (CLI)

Check a YAML/JSON experiment spec before running:

```bash
vamos --config configs/experiment.yaml --validate-config
```

## 18. Convert Results to a DataFrame (pandas)

Export results for analysis in pandas (requires the `analysis` extra).

```python
from vamos import optimize
from vamos.ux.api import result_to_dataframe

result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=4000)
df = result_to_dataframe(result)
df.to_csv("results/zdt1_nsgaii_front.csv", index=False)
```

## 19. Combine Fronts from Multiple Runs

Merge fronts from multiple runs and keep the non-dominated set.

```python
import numpy as np

from vamos import optimize
from vamos.foundation.metrics.pareto import pareto_filter

results = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=4000, seed=[0, 1, 2])
combined = np.vstack([res.F for res in results if res.F is not None])
front = pareto_filter(combined, return_indices=False)
```

## 20. Compute Hypervolume (2D)

Compute hypervolume for 2D minimization fronts.

```python
import numpy as np

from vamos import optimize
from vamos.foundation.metrics import compute_hypervolume

result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=4000)
F = np.asarray(result.F)
hv = compute_hypervolume(F, ref_point=[1.1, 1.1])
print(hv)
```

## 21. Normalized HV for ZDT Problems

Use the built-in reference front to compute normalized hypervolume on ZDT.

```python
import numpy as np

from vamos import optimize
from vamos.foundation.metrics import compute_normalized_hv

result = optimize("zdt1", algorithm="nsgaii", budget=4000)
hv_norm = compute_normalized_hv(np.asarray(result.F), "zdt1")
print(hv_norm)
```
